Sydney Model United Nations 2013 
Rules of Procedure of the International Criminal Court 


Benjamin Cheung (committees@sydmun.com) 

Introduction 

These are the rules for the International Criminal Court that will be running at SydMUN 2013. 
While these rules are quite formal, please do not be intimidated by them. Your Directors will be 
there to guide you through their application, and to explain them to you if necessary. Finally, as the 
International Criminal Court operates in quite a different way to standard committees, these rules 
are only intended to facilitate debate and are intended to be quite flexible in their application. In this 
respect, note in particular rule 8. 

Preliminary 

1. 
Scope of the Rules – These rules of procedure shall apply throughout all sessions of the 
International Criminal Court judgement deliberation at SydMUN 2013. The rules shall also 
apply to any members of the Press Gallery in this committee. 
2. 
Statements by the Secretariat – The SydMUN Secretariat (which includes Directors of the 
International Criminal Court) may interrupt the Court at any time to make a statement on 
any subject. 
3. 
Public Observation – No member of the public shall enter the Court without permission and 
introduction from a member of the SydMUN Secretariat. 
4. 
Language – The Court shall operate in English. 
Management of the Court 

5. 
Agenda – the Court shall deliberate on a hypothetical indictment, preparing judgements and 
separate opinions. The Secretariat may add urgent items to the agenda at its discretion. 
6. 
Role of Directors – Directors are responsible for facilitation debate amongst judges, 
implementing and enforcing the rules, and communicating information to and from the 
Secretariat. The directors may also serve in the role of counsel during the presentation of 
oral arguments. 
7. 
Powers of Directors – The director may open and close deliberation at his or her discretion; 
propose a motion listed under the rules; rule on matters of procedure; distribute materials; 
censure judges; and exercise all other powers necessary to enforce the rules and to ensure 
the smooth running of the Court. 

8. 
Power of Directors to Deviate from the Rules – In light of the nature of the International 
Criminal Court, the directors have the power to deviate from these rules if the effective 
facilitation of the Court’s process requires it. For example, this enables, if necessary, 
directors to permit motions for things not specifically outlined in these rules. 
9. 
Appeals – Judges may appeal a decision of the director. To appeal a decision, a judge should 
call a point of order and request an appeal. The appeal shall be considered by the alternate 
director, who shall oversee the Court for the duration of the appeal. The alternate director 
may disallow frivolous appeals. If the appeal is not disallowed as frivolous, the judge shall 
speak to his or her appeal for no more than one minute. The director may then speak in 
defence of his or her ruling. The appeal shall then be put to a vote. The decision of the 
director shall only be overturned if a two-thirds majority is attained. 
10. 
Conduct System – A director may deliver a warning to any judge they feel to be consistently 
out of order, acting undiplomatically, or acting in any way inconsistent with the spirit of the 
Court and SydMUN 2013. There shall be no penalty for the first warning. A second warning 
in the same session shall result in a loss of speaking rights for the judge for the remainder of 
that session 
11. 
Note Passing – Notes may be passed in the Court. Notes may not be frivolous or irrelevant. 
All notes must state clearly both to whom it is addressed and who it is from. The directors 
may intercept and/or read any note. No Judge may intercept or read a note not addressed to 
them. 
12. 
Arriving Late to Court – Penalties for late arrival shall be subject to the discretion of the 
director. Consistent lateness may also be managed under the Conduct System. 
13. 
Leaving the Court – Judges may leave a Committee session at any time, so long as this does 
not interrupt a speaker. Judges wishing to leave Court for any longer than a very short break 
(five minutes) should notify the director in advance, and should inform him or her as to their 
expected time of return. Any proxy votes must lodged prior to a judge leaving the committee 
room. 
14. 
Press and Non-Governmental Organisations – Members of the press may observe Court 
proceedings until the judges reside into the deliberation phase. The Court may also close the 
Court to the press at any time and at their discretion. Non-governmental organisations may 
not participate in any way in the Court. 
15. 
Behaviour in the Court – All present in the Court, or participating in its proceedings, shall 
behave in a respectful and appropriate manner for the duration of their involvement with the 
Court. Judges should utilise and address others in judicial and diplomatic language. 
Proceedings of the Court 

16. 
Quorum – Quorum shall by three registered judges of the Court. If quorum is not met at any 
point, the committee cannot function. Verification of quorum shall take place at the 
commencement of the first session and by a judge’s request. 

17. 
Order of Session – A session of the court shall commence with preliminary proceedings of 
the Court and then continue with the relevant stage of the substantive proceedings of the 
Court. Press conferences shall occur as scheduled by the Secretariat. 
18. 
Preliminary Proceedings of the Court – The preliminary proceedings of the Court for a 
session of the Court shall be ordered as follows: statements by judges, minute of prayer or 
meditation, introduction of members of the press gallery, substantive proceedings of the 
Court and closure of session. 
19. 
Substantive Proceedings of the Court – The substantive proceedings of the Court shall 
commence with the presentation of submissions and preliminary opinions, followed by 
deliberation and the adoption of judgement and separate opinions. 
Preliminary Proceedings of the Court 

20. 
Statements by Judges – at the beginning of each session, judges may request time to give a 
short address on a legal issue pertinent to the matter being considered by the Court. This 
shall be at the discretion of the director. 
21. 
Minute of Prayer or Meditation – At the beginning of each session, judges may request a 
minute of prayer or meditation. The judge shall be asked to specify a particular topic to be 
considered. This shall be at the discretion of the director. 
22. 
Introduction of Members of the Press Gallery – Members of the press gallery shall be 
introduced to the Court. Until a member of the press is introduced, the press member shall 
not report on Court proceedings or interact with judges. 
Substantive Proceedings of the Court 

Presentation of Submissions and Preliminary Options 

23. 
Definition of Presentation of Submissions and Preliminary Opinions – Presentation of 
submissions refers to the delivery of oral arguments by the directors and/or others acting as 
counsel. Preliminary opinions refers to the speeches given by judges as to their initial 
thoughts and ideas regarding the legal issues brought forth by the case at the conclusion of 
the presentation of submissions. 
24. 
Presentation of Submissions – Submissions shall be presented orally by prosecution and 
defence counsel and be divided into two sections: opening and closing arguments. In each, 
the prosecution shall speak first and the defence second. 
25. 
Opening Arguments – Counsel will deliver their substantial arguments during opening 
arguments. Arguments shall be limited to twenty minutes each, excluding examination time. 
Counsel may refer to written or other material. 
26. 
Closing Arguments – Counsel shall summarise their arguments and may wish to rebut or 
sur-rebut arguments presented by opposing counsel. Closing arguments shall be limited to 
ten minutes each, excluding examination time. Counsel may not introduce new material. 
Closing arguments are to take place at the completion of the opening arguments of the 
appellant and the respondent. 

27. 
Questioning of Counsel – Judges may examine counsel either during, or at the end of, oral 
submissions. A judge should preface his or her question with “excuse me, counsel” or other 
cordial terms to that effect. The directors may reject questions at their discretion. 
28. 
Preliminary Opinions – At the completion of closing arguments by counsel, all judges shall 
be invited to speak for no more than five minutes summarising their preliminary thoughts 
and ideas on the legal issues raised by the case. 
Deliberation 

29. 
Presumption of a speakers list – Deliberation within the Court shall be presumed to take 
place as a general speakers list with a standard speaking time of two minutes, unless a judge 
motions for a change of speaking time, or motion for the suspension of the deliberation. 
30. 
Procedure in the speakers list – Judges shall only speak when recognised by the director. 
Judges shall stand to speak. No speech shall exceed five minutes. No speakers’ list shall be 
drawn up. At the completion of the preceding speech, the director shall call for those 
wishing to speak next to raise their placards and then recognise one such judge, who shall 
then stand and speak. Judges could also send a note to the directors for the purpose to be 
added on the list at any time. 
31. 
Definition of the suspension of Deliberation – the suspension is a period of a fixed time 
length during which judges may circulate and informally discuss issues arising from the 
topic under discussion. No points or motions from the floor shall be entertained. 
32. 
Initiation of a suspension – a suspension shall be initiated by a motion from a judge. At the 
initiation of a suspension, the director shall specify the duration, and may impose limits on 
the suspension. 
33. 
Duration of a suspension – The duration of a suspension shall be set by the directors, 
although judges may proposes time limits. The time limit as announced by the director shall 
be strictly applied, although it may extended at the discretion of the director. All judges must 
return to their seats once the suspension has expired, or indicated to the directors that they 
are leaving the courtroom in accordance with Rule 12. 
34. 
Location of a suspension – Judges may leave the courtroom during the unmoderated 
deliberation, subject to any restrictions imposed by the directors. It is the responsibility of 
the judges to ensure they return to the courtroom at the completion of the unmoderated 
deliberation. 
Draft and Final Judgements, and Dissenting Opinions 

35. 
Distribution of Draft Judgements – Judges may submit draft judgements to directors at any 
time. In order to be distributed, draft judgments should be signed, , typed in the manner of a 
legal opinion, and free from spelling and grammatical errors. The director may use their 
discretion to refuse distribution after providing reason to the author. Draft judgements are 
informative only and may be amended after distribution. 

36. 
Presentation of Draft Judgments – Judges may, at any time after the distribution of their 
draft judgment by the directors, motion for the opportunity to present it to the court. If the 
motion passes, they may highlight key points of the judgment in a short address and then 
answer questions regarding the judgment from other members of the court. 
37. 
Final Judgements – Judges may motion for their draft judgments to be adopted by the court 
as a final judgment. Directors are to ensure that such draft judgments have first undergone 
the procedures outlined in Rules 36 and 37 and have at least thirty percent of judges as 
signatories. If successful, judges who vote in favour of such a motion become signatories 
and it shall become the final judgement of the court. 
38. 
Dissenting Opinions – Draft judgements that have undergone the procedures outlined in 
Rules 36 and 37 but fail to obtain a majority of votes, can, at the discretion of the author(s), 
become a dissenting opinion without being put to a further vote. 
39. 
Finality of Judgement and Opinions – Once a final judgment has been reached, no judge 
who is a signatory to that judgment can be removed. This rule does not apply to dissenting 
opinions. 
40. 
Judges Must Support a Judgement – All judges must either author or concur with a final 
judgment or join or present a dissenting opinion. 
Points and Motions on the Floor 

41. 
Raising Points or Motions from the Floor – Generally, when raising a point or motion from 
the floor, a judge should raise his or her placard, and when recognised by the director, state 
the point or motion being raised. The exception to this rule is points of order, which may 
interrupt speakers. 
42. 
Points of Order – A judge may call a point of order if another judge or the director is in 
breach of these rules of procedure. A point of order may interrupt the debate at any time, 
although it is suggested that judges refrain from doing so unless they are quite sure of a 
serious breach of the rules that has the capacity to affect the outcome of debate. When a 
point of order is recognised, the judge shall explain, in less than thirty seconds, how 
procedure has not been followed. The director shall then rule as to whether the point is in or 
out of order. 
43. 
Points of Personal Privilege – Points of personal privilege may be raised if a speaker is 
inaudible or any matter of the court environment is unsatisfactory. When a point of personal 
privilege is recognised, the judge raising the point is to explain his or her concern in less 
than thirty seconds. Unless urgent, points of personal privilege should be made in writing. 
44. 
Points of Procedural Enquiry – A point of procedural enquiry allows a judge to clarify 
matters of procedure. Points of procedural enquiry may not interrupt speakers. When a point 
of procedural enquiry is recognised, the judge raising the point is to outline, in less than 
thirty seconds, what element of procedure on which he or she wishes clarification. Unless 
urgent, points of procedural enquiry should be made in writing. Whether or not the point is 
made orally, the director shall respond with an oral declaration to all judges. 

45. 
Points of Information – Points of information are brief, relevant questions offered to other 
judges and counsel during the presentation of draft judgements, and the submissions and 
preliminary opinions. Judges may choose to accept or refuse points of information. If a 
judge elects or format requires speakers to take points of information, the director will invite 
judges wishing to make such points to raise their placards and await recognition. The 
director or judge may limit the number of points of information at his or her discretion. 
46. 
Motion for a suspension of deliberation– A motion for suspension may be proposed at any 
time. Judges proposing such a motion may wish to specify the proposed duration of the 
deliberation. If the motion passes, the court shall be suspended. 
47. 
Motion to Present a Draft Judgement – A motion to present a draft judgement may only be 
proposed after it has been distributed to all judges by the director. Only the author(s) of a 
draft judgement may raise this motion. If the motion passes, the proposed draft judgement 
shall be presented under Rule 37. 
48. 
Motion for Straw Poll – A judge or director may move a motion for a straw poll on any issue 
arising from discussion. Upon raising the motion, he or she must specify the issue to be 
polled. If the motion passes a straw poll shall be taken. 
49. 
Motion for a Final Judgement – A motion for a draft judgement to be adopted as the final 
judgement of the court may only occur after undergoing the procedures outlined in Rule 36, 
37 and 38. If the motion passes, judges who vote in favour shall become signatories to the 
final judgement. 
50. 
Motion to Adjourn Session – A motion to adjourn debate may be requested towards the end 
of court session. Should such a motion pass, the session shall come to a close with the 
director making note of the time that the court will reconvene. 
Voting 

51. 
Classes of Vote – There shall be two classes of vote: procedural and straw polls. All votes on 
motions, amendments, and any other matter, except for straw polls, shall be procedural. All 
votes shall occur by placard. 
52. 
Voting Rights – Only judges shall have the right to vote. Each judge in the court shall have 
one vote. 
53. 
Passing of Procedural Votes – All procedural votes require a simple majority of present and 
voting members to pass. 
54. 
Procedure of Straw Polls – The topic of the straw poll will be announced prior to the vote. 
Judges may vote for, against or abstain. Straw polls shall not be taken as passed or failed, 
but at the completion of the poll the director shall announce the results. 
55. 
Procedure of Placard Votes – In a placard vote, judges vote by raising their placard only. 

56. 
Conduct during Voting – Note passing will be closed. No points of procedure or motions 
from the floor will be entertained during voting. A point of order may only be called if the 
director has failed to oversee the vote in accordance with these rules. 
57. 
Proxy Voting – When a judge is, for whatever reason, unable to remain in the committee 
chamber for a substantive vote, he or she may submit a proxy vote in writing to the 
directors. Proxy votes may entrust the judge’s voting power to another delegate with voting 
rights, or may direct how the absent judge will vote on a specific draft resolution or 
amendment. 
58. 
Equally Divided Votes – If a vote is equally divided and a simple majority is required, a 
recount shall be called. If the recount is equally divided: 
a. Procedural votes shall be taken as failed; 
b. Straw polls shall be taken as complete and debate resumed. 

